without further ado i'm really excited
to introduce our first speaker of the
day then maury sound rajon um who is a
is has i've had so much i've had such an
amazing time getting to know and
learning from over the past few weeks
leading up to the festival
then mori is a dalit american artist
technologist and the executive director
of the quality labs an art and
technology startup supporting south
asian asian religious cultural and
genderqueer communities in the united
states and south asia
through her work she organizes
communities to fight impunity state
violence anti-blackness caste apartheid
and religious intolerance her work has
been recognized by the robert
rauschenberg foundation producers guild
of america diversity program
and the museum of contemporary art and
magnum foundation
with that we're going to turn over to
themori's talk and we'll be back
afterwards for some q a please drop your
questions into the chat we'll try to get
to as many as we can
hi everybody my name is then mori and
i'm here from equality labs and it's my
honor and my pleasure to be joining you
all here at the gray area festival
and you know part of why i was so
excited to be able to help kick off the
conversations today um about the worlds
that we want to build whether virtual
material or spiritual
is because i think that you know what we
imagine really matters and you know in
the work that i do both as an activist
and as a technologist and as a futurist
i find that most people
cannot begin to fight for freedom
because they cannot imagine themselves
to be free
and as a result
what we do in the imaginary is so
crucial
and what i think is so profound at this
moment is that at a time when we are
facing multiple crises
and we are seeing you know big tech
amplify violence because of those crisis
that instead of us pausing and taking a
moment to reflect about where we are
as a species and the kinds of tools we
need to bring in
another
way forward
we are seeing a doubling down of violent
approaches to technology and world
building and i think there's no bigger
you know example of this as the current
discourse around the metaverse and for
folks who don't know the metaverse like
no i'm not talking about the multi
the multiverse as seen by
dc comics
but i'm talking about this notion that
the next phase of the internet is going
to be one where
there is a shared virtual environment
that you know from infrastructure to um
interactivity uh is
one in which we imagine this to be
another um you know possible place that
we will engage as a species with each
other and
um conduct all of the the aspects of
society within it
and you know the thing i was so troubled
by is that the announcement of the
metaverse wasn't just that the metaverse
is the next future and this is where
we're going to be
but that it was actually coming from
companies like facebook and mark's you
know mark zuckerberg's like you know
great ambition to have facebook be the
center of the metaverse you know whether
it's his investments in you know
you know thousands of engineers in
europe or the aggressive rebrand that
they're making to move beyond the social
media platform world into the building
of this new augmented reality of the
metaverse
and the thing that struck me about it is
that
all of the people that were talking
about the metaverse were white cis men
in silicon valley many of whom really
should not be building any tech at all
at this point
and you know
and i think that in many ways like what
we need to do is have a whole reset
in terms of the ways that we look at and
build technology because how we're doing
it right now is not working
and when you take into
you know for example something like
facebook i mean facebook is a company
that was built by
college grads at harvard to basically
you know pick up hot chicks right
that is not and then this platform was
further invested in by the cia because
when you map social networks you create
a lot of
intelligence that's useful to weaponize
for the state
and this platform then was created
without any of the cultural competencies
or relationships of consent or processes
of co-designed and equitable
sharing of knowledge and profits and
data in the global south and essentially
created without ethics for the sense of
profit and i think that what has been
begotten from this terrible process
is you know the widespread decimation of
multiple democracies in the world
and
you know to me that is so striking that
like you know if i were you know in
charge of a multi-billion dollar company
that happened to
be responsible for genocides in uh
myanmar you know a social media war in
syria
the imminent genocide that's happening
in india
and a coup in the united states
i would for one perhaps not invest in a
pr rollout that says we're going to be
building more tech that is thoughtless
and not responsible or accountable
i would actually maybe say i should stop
and as a buddhist i think that's a very
profound thing to say we don't have to
continue in mindless ways we can
actually pause and reflect
and you know
it
for me i think that it's important when
harm is done that we don't just ram
through
the harm we have to sit down and be able
to process both what was lost
and also create space for those that
have been harmed to help envision what
would restore themselves
and i think in all of the aspects that
we see when we're looking at big tech
that is not happening and i think that
we have an opportunity with the
metaverse conversations
to pivot the conversation differently
because even with big tech you know big
tech is representative of many
iterations of technol technological
development um that has been ushered in
by white supremacist institutions that
have not served the species
but has served you know the
the the few at the top to exploit the
many at the bottom
so whether you're thinking about the
development of the gun or the industrial
revolution and extractive economies what
we see is that tech without intention
without an understanding of impact and
assessment
continues to create radiating cycles of
pattern
and violence
and as someone who is you know um a
daughter of people who have been cast
depressed you know um you know i am
adelet and you know in our context in
south asia you know our big
intersectional system that we deal with
is the caste system
and you know just like in the context of
race where you're dealing with white
supremacy we deal with brahmanism you
know the the people who developed the
scriptures that basically enslaved our
peoples for many years
and what i've learned is is that you
can't actually begin to imagine radical
futures
until you slow down and examine
where in you
have you experienced introduction
intergenerational trauma and violence
from structures of exclusion
and i think that we are in a reckoning
that understands that the tech that is
being pushed forth by capital that you
know feels too big to fail and that can
never be stopped
actually can be stopped tech doesn't
exist in some sort of like you know
engine of possibility it is created by
people it is sustained by people and so
within these big massive institutions
there are there are individuals that can
make different choices that say i don't
want to be part of a system of death
i want to choose life
and i think that's part of the call that
i would really love to you know issue
for folks right now is what are ways
that we can choose life together what
are ways that we can slow down the need
of us addressing the flow of capital by
pushing and pushing and pushing and
grabbing and grabbing and grabbing we're
not in some sort of model of the digital
manifest destiny that if we don't grab
this real estate someone else will that
is a deficit model that comes from
predator systems like white supremacy
when we really understand what is it
that we want to do when we want to build
a tool that will connect us as a species
we have so many other options that come
other come from other scientific world
views and if we don't see ourselves like
within the cartesian split where our
body is separated from the spirit from
each other we have opportunities to look
at the ways that we are all connected
with the web of life
and you know i think about that a lot
with um the the current phase of the
internet because
you know for me like you know as someone
who was a dullet you know it was very
scary to
grow up um cast depressed you know you
faced a lot of violence and
um discrimination and
you know the the power of the internet
was that it connected people across you
know bias and divides and atrocity and
as someone who was one of the first
delete people who
uh was able to be present and be out you
know it was a really joyous experience
in the beginning because you could say
your truth and people would resonate
with that truth and then you would build
community and all of a sudden you went
from being this person that was so
uh bereft and cut off from um you know
kinship
uh to someone who was connected and had
family all around the world
and then of course the structures that
were made without our consent you know
because even though they operate as like
community spaces they're fundamentally
corporate surveilled spaces that were
designed to make us the product
um what we saw is this like wonderful
community space eventually become what
it was meant to be you know a place that
harvests us harvests our data um and
polarizes us um and really actually
connects us in a false sense of uh
community
and and that's some of the deeper things
that i would really want to encourage
people to think about is that
you know when you think about the work
of um you know dr steven porges and the
idea of
um the polyvagal theory which you know
assumes that you know as human beings
our nervous systems you know evolved for
us to connect with each other to find
the regulation of our nervous systems
through connection and face and our
emotions um are really the ways that we
create a system with each other you know
we are essentially you know creating our
own mycelial network you know in our
species by connection
and so the tool that was built you know
whether it's facebook or youtube or
snapchat or tick tock they have the
appearance of connection but without the
benefit of
nervous co-regulation in fact quite the
opposite happens i can't tell you how
many people that we come across that
we're working with who tell us like i'm
so stressed out about being on the
internet i might have fomo or i might
have people sending me rape threats or
in the case of dull it's like we have
people who you know use all sorts of
cast slurs and disgusting things to
dehumanize us and you are in a state of
your nervous system constantly being
stimulated constantly being under attack
and it's the exact opposite of the
conditions that you need to be able to
emotionally co-regulate with someone you
know it is fast speedy without thought
so it's actually tapping into some of
the most you know primal parts of your
nervous system
and what we see as a result is that
people are increasingly polarized
polarized polarized particularly as
they're abetted by algorithms that are
biased and benefit from us being in
filter bubbles where they can shape us
you know tame us
and
ultimately um make money off of our
demise
and i think that again you know as
someone who's a buddhist when i see that
process when i see how
disconnected we're becoming even in
these tools that are meant to connect us
uh i would like to encourage us to you
know think about a different kind of
metaverse
and in you know in buddhism there's this
idea of meta which is like loving
kindness
and i would just you know wonder like
what would happen if we were to think
about not capital as the core of the
worlds that we build
but love
and possibility
and hope
what if we were to create a meta verse
in the context of loving kindness
and that all of the ways that we learn
to communicate with each other in this
virtual world were about us being
embodied as we spoke and worked with
each other
were about us being having tools for us
to be more self-aware
about
what's happening with our nervous system
when we're interacting with content
and that would allow us to both pause
and also be prepared for courageous
conversation when there is disagreement
these are all the things that we can be
able to achieve if we have a
trauma-informed approach both in terms
of how we're dealing with our historical
legacies but also how those inform this
very particular contentious a moment but
also in the ways that we want to build
the future that we need to together and
it might sound like a radical
proposition to try to consider
bringing in trauma-informed practices
and the ways that we build these
processes but i think it's super
critical for us to be able to do that
wow welcome back everybody oh my gosh
then maury what a powerful presentation
um you know i don't even know where to
to begin
um i think that you know as as doreen
mentioned in the comments um
we really need new metaphors um because
the ones that we have are continue as
you mentioned as you've explained are
continuing to ex
accentuate so many different harms
really dangerous harms
um
and
i think that you know to to start off um
i i really wanted you to come in and be
one of the first talks of the of the
festival because your
your talk poses so many questions and
really roots us in a way of thinking um
about these issues and about these
topics um and you know you you go into
this in the in the
in the talk but
what are those questions and how should
people like what
things should people be keeping in mind
first and foremost so that we can start
building things in a way that more
closely matches the
ethics and the morals that we hold
well i think what's really important is
that we we don't give in to the crisis
of imaginary that capitalism uh really
puts us in which is that these processes
these companies are too big to fail and
that we have to be on their timeline
their design protocols and their
delivery of services and product um
without uh without question
you know and i feel like there is you
know that's why i was saying like in
when i was watching all of this you know
kind of those three streams where you're
watching these incredible harms that are
coming out from whistleblowers um every
day related to facebook
and you're seeing an unprecedented layer
of like worker strikes all around the
country
and you compare that with the bizarre
and disconnected pr push for the
metaverse
and um it's just like there's such a
dissonance like our species is really at
a level of crisis we cannot continue the
way that we've been going uh to this
point
and and i feel like the people have
caused harm are not listening you know
frankly like if i was mark zuckerberg i
would say time out
i need to be in a room with no internet
and no
other digital protocols for like two
years and reflect upon the fact that the
tech i created has brought multiple
democracies to heal and have abetted
genocides and coups not the least of
which is in our country
why on earth would someone who has
created tech that has such severe
consequences then be leaning into a new
direction of the metaverse i just i find
that so absurd and yet we've seen that
over and over again from white supremacy
whether it's the extraction economy or
um
uh the ways that we even hear the
language of manifest destiny it's like
there's the only the only thing we could
do is colonize mars the only thing we
can do is desecrate you know um our
landscape and to do this with our
etheric realm with the ways that we
would imagine and put ourselves into
um virtual space with each other and i
think you know what we need to do is
stop pretending that white supremacist
um
you know technology is the only
scientific world view that we can
actually draw upon to build species
level technology and i think that's part
of the questions we need to really start
to ask to ask ourselves is that the
cartesian split that informs so many of
the ideas that are behind enlightenment
informed scientific methods is not the
only worldview game in town
and so i'm just wondering if we slowed
ourselves down
took a pause
and said what other world views that
look at connection that look at the self
that look at what interconnectedness
means for us as you know individual
beings to the species and to
um you know to existence can we draw
upon to create models for our tools
and and i think that requires a huge
reset you know and i think dorian before
we were talking you were talking about
like i really hope that we're in this
moment where we stop seeing you know um
stuff being driven from the global north
and i was like absolutely you know the
answers for what the species needs is
very abundantly shown that it cannot be
developed in the global north we need to
unleash creators and dreamers
and architects from the global south
that intimately have a very different
world view about what connection means
and can dream differently you know and i
imagine like what if the metaverse was
like developed by witches and dreamers
and um you know uh single moms who you
know lived in villages
what would that metaverse look like you
know i don't think we need another
disaster that we've seen social media
began for us you know
absolutely and i also think that
you know taking that into account also
requires
asking
in a way
who gets to
design if that's the proper word for it
who gets to design the future who gets
to design how the future looks like
right
when actually when you think about the
future it is something that feels more
like an expanded present rather than
a very bizarre destination that is i
don't know like sometimes when i see
these uh technological innovations and
the way that a lot of
white sees men from silicon valley are
looking into the future or the so-called
future it always um in a way
encompasses
a time frame that is not even
available for us to actually think about
when we are in a constant state of
crisis right so
i kept on thinking within your talk
about the current state or the current
let's say
ecosystem of mexico city and even though
mexico city of course is a very
beautiful place to live in
it also has a lot of issues that are so
unresolved at the moment that doesn't
necessarily allow us to look into the
future as in 50 to 70 100 years right so
how are we gonna build that future if we
cannot envision that at the moment and i
came to thinking how do you think maybe
we can start uh broadening that
conversation especially from within
perhaps not necessarily just the arts
and culture but just maybe in within i
don't know like um
experimental pedagogies or experimental
approaches for building together or for
at least imagining together because in a
way sometimes the reason why of course i
mean you know kind of quoting this
really uh famous
um you know a notion of why can we
envision the what is it why is it easy
for us to envision the end of the world
rather than envision the end of
capitalism or the end of racism or the
end of
whatever other
urgent topic we have currently on our
hands and and i think of course the
answer to that question is because we've
been developing a lot of different ways
of imagining the end of the world we
haven't been
working let's say working perhaps
working is not the word for it but
imagining the end of other things that
need to
end earlier than the end of the world i
don't know i mean um i am just curious
on what's your perspective on how or
where
should we
maybe start fostering these
conversations perhaps it's not
necessarily just the arts and culture
but
other places as well and um i don't know
what's your your perspective on on that
or your experience of course on that
well i think we have to imagine like our
lives depended on it you know we have
ceded the realm of the imaginary to
capital not always by will right you
know the you know the the you know the
powers of white supremacy and
colonialism is such that they asserted
their imaginary on multiple world views
for
um you know centuries right um but to be
able to take back
that right you know and to me i remember
the very you know clear moment when i
decided i was a futurist i was at mit
and i would be at these like gatherings
of like all white men in ac rooms
talking about the future of things
and i was like how do they know the
future for you know a single mother in a
village in bihar how how on earth would
they know when they've never stepped on
the soil they've never smelt the air and
touched the leaves and the trees that
she knows it's like utterly absurd
but in order to be able to bring parody
to the imaginary we need to start
looking at futurism as a decentralized
participatory process where lots of
different people and lots of different
fields can start to dream
and dreaming is actually much harder in
a time of grief right when we have just
come out of the pandemic and numerous
countries are facing you know
authoritative regimes and
you know the the incredible loss of life
and instability at this moment it feels
like dreaming is the most um luxurious
thing to do
but in fact we are kind of trapped in
the nightmare of capital
and so there there's a very specific
decision we have to make to say that
path is not ours you know that is that
you know like some one one idea i always
had when i was in the pandemic is like
how did i get stuck in this timeline
somewhere there is a happy thing
in another multiverse that is living
without a pandemic but i actually think
we have to take those tools of of being
able to say this is not our this is not
the timeline we need let's imagine what
that other is and i think sometimes when
you think about big institutions like
whether you're thinking about
intergovernmental organizations or
you're thinking about you know nation
states it feels so hard to detach
from those violent nightmares but i
think you begin small you know because i
think the imaginary in a radical
imagining it's like a muscle it's it's
as much like process as it is practice
and sometimes when people are grief like
you know it really just shuts you down
so i think we need like a a radical
practice of making even if it's small
things you know i'm gonna make you know
um you know tools for a world that has
you know looking at um
uh looking at ways of like living in a
solar punk world you know what what do
they wear in terms of hats what is a
world that's already had collective
labor look like you know what are the
kinds of companies that form you know
what are the clothes that you wear for
variable um climate um uh
and you know volatile climate conditions
and in that i think that making itself
actually is a way to restart your own
engine of joy and to be able to start to
see possibility so my sense is is that
it's not going to take there's not going
to be one person that drops here's the
manifesto for the future let's roll with
it you know we actually did we already
did that with like the you know the
modern version of futurism and that's
like not the one that we want what we
need is lots of decentralized futurisms
where people are exploring and building
alternatives out of the ashes of what
we're seeing of a failed system but we
don't have to stay in those failures we
need to begin you know micro experiments
then like fractals can become bigger and
bigger as we see successes as people
start to see new ways of interacting
building social relationships and
economic relationships and also you know
knitting back consent into all of those
different realms that we interact with
because part of what's broken right now
is we live in a society without consent
you know we didn't consent to the rape
of the earth we didn't consent to the
exploitation of our labor we didn't
consent to colonial borders that limit
migration when people have migrated for
many years across land masses so to
re-change we shift we need to trust
ourselves that we can dream ourselves
and heal ourselves and that's a very
different kind of protocol than what's
coming out of venture capital which is
you know the scarcity model like we have
to do the metaverse whoever builds the
metaverse first is going to be the one
that controls it you know i kept
thinking of like as i was reading some
of those screeds i was thinking about
like the eye of sauron you know you know
one ring to rule them all it was like
one metaverse to trap us all you know
and what we would see is like you know
these very you know it was reminding me
of that like pink floyd lyric you know
you traded tree you know hot ashes for
trees you know we don't need connection
that is false and we don't need hollowed
out versions of what true interconnected
is true interconnection can be when we
can take a little bit of a slower time
and bring more voices to the co-design
table and experiment um to creating you
know that you know like in the buddhist
sense a metaverse you know a place of
kindness a place of empathy and a place
of consent and joy
absolutely
i think that's such a i mean it's such a
beautiful sentiment and it's something
that i've been thinking about a lot you
know i do a lot of work with nft artists
and um and in in that in the kind of
crypto community where this these sorts
of conversations just feel
so
like
intense because it's something is
changing you know there's a moment where
people feel like there could be a
rewrite of a certain protocol and what
we're seeing instead is just the same
kinds of exclusionary practices that are
rooted in capitalist extraction just
pervade again and again and again and
become more
cemented in the protocol
and you know one thing that i've been
arguing for since the very beginning is
that we can't have an nft
economy that's rooted in a marketplace
it needs to be rooted in experience
because that's what the artwork is about
like if we're just treating these things
as commodities if we're just working in
this way that is continuing to feed this
machine we can't actually get to that
place of connection where i share an
image and it connects to you and we have
a moment of through the through the
wires through the fiber optic cables
through the networks that actually
brings us together in a way that as you
said is really rooted in in love um and
i think that you know while we're while
we're talking about this we have a
question from the audience that i think
is
quite relevant um and oddball asks how
much of facebook's detrimental influence
is due to something novel facebook is
doing versus simply being an amplifier
for existing human behaviors and
existing systems of oppression and
injustice and how might we get the
benefits of social networks and global
communication while discouraging the
harmful behavior
and i'd love to hear your both of your
thoughts on this
well i think that there's you know
there's the way that i would answer it
in terms of like what do we need out of
a tech that can connect us as a species
and what is facebook doing wrong so i'd
kind of like partition it separately and
i spoke a little bit about this in my
talk but i feel like
you know when you look at the way that
our nervous systems have evolved they
have evolved to
co-regulate with each other that's like
the heart of the polyvagal theory right
is that we need connection we're
connecting our nervous systems settle
and get to a basal equilibrium when we
have human connection
the approximation that social media is
supposed to you know have of that
connection is actually not only a bad
one
but also it doesn't actually offer a way
for equilibrium and nervous reset in
fact it keeps you in a state of constant
nervous de disregulation and i would
argue that in some of the ux theory and
market theory that companies like
facebook are doing there are banking on
that they want to keep you in a state of
nervous dysregulation because fear and
anger are huge drivers in your filter
bubbles which makes you want to click
more and stay more and give them more
money you know so they're trapping us in
like you know these illusory hells
of our own traumatized nervous system
right and
um and so i think that there's actually
lots of different ways to slow down to
have people be thoughtful and i think
some of it requires us to have greater
legibility to our somatic responses to
uh uncomfortable conversations to um
to things that um you know can actually
instead of being wounds could be portals
into shared communication and so in some
ways like what we need is not just
technologists at the table we need
psychologists we need people who um
understand at a deep deep level how do
we create more resilience related to
racial and class and gender and past
discomfort um
we are becoming incredibly brittle and
unable to create societal consensus in
part because social media is training us
to stop the process of listening and
regulation to that end so i actually
think we need a whole redesign
of that process and for example like in
real life like if i was talking to wade
and you said something that really upset
me
i could take a beat
right
and be like okay i'm gonna you know
breathe a little bit because whatever
wade said it's a signal that comes to me
and if my nervous system is set to be
triggered i can act in an amplified way
or i could take a little time to
attenuate that signal
and be relaxed and be like okay i'm not
in a survival situation but i'd like to
talk a weight and see if we could
actually come to a consensus you know
you can't do that in social media the
way that it's constructed and it was
never meant to do that you know so it's
kind of like would you take you know a
lawn mower to help you with surgery no
and actually all the people that built
facebook along the way are totally
incompetent when it comes to psychology
cultural competence you know the aspects
of democracy what they do know how to do
is to exploit and make money and this
isn't like all of the workers at these
companies i'm talking about the c-suite
level they know exactly what they were
doing to capture their market their goal
was never about connection it was about
capturing the market and i think that's
why i'm so
outraged um
at looking at what uh the discussion is
coming from
these bad actors you know is that they
know better they know exactly what they
did and we as a community we also have a
role because we are employees at these
companies we are users of these
companies we actually can say we don't
want to participate in our own
extinction
we can say we want another way you know
i mean absolutely i mean and just to
just attack on i think the example of
this that is the easiest to understand
you know of you know a really concrete
way of how this works is look at the
look at your computer i mean it's called
look at the design of your computer it's
called a desktop we have a recycling bin
we have files and folders this entire
our portal into the metaverse is
constructed upon a capitalist white
collar version of
labor and defines our experience through
that through that uh through that lens
um and that's at the very very baseline
you know that doesn't include any of the
visible any of the invisible things that
we can't see like you know uh wendy chen
who's going to speak later this weekend
talks a lot in her one of her favorite
books of mine uh control and freedom
about you know how data how data packet
switching works and who we don't think
the average internet user has no concept
of what's happening in the wires in
their home to make this happen um and
all of it's been designed in a really
particular way um and so i don't know
that just it just feels so cogent to me
um
did you have something you wanted to add
yeah and i just wanted to add that
also sometimes i think we have this
feeling of
unease you know of not being able to do
anything about it which i think is also
of course designed into this whole
conversation right by all of these
interfaces that are being built in a
very particular way for us to feel like
that but then at the same time
i think that the more that we
i don't know that we get engaged with
these conversations the more that we can
create and imagine like you said
on your talk
new metaphors for it like that that is
what we need as well like we need to
start envisioning that because the
metaphors that we have right now not
only are not useful but are very harmful
as well and it comes from of course also
the imaginary
um that we create and build of where
what's our role within all of this
conversation right and i kept on
thinking a lot about how like very very
recently i had this conversation with my
with my grandma and she was like but why
is this facebook guy super rich like he
doesn't charge for you know for the
service and she was like trying to make
sense of that and i think you know like
for her it just doesn't make sense to
have something that is
apparently free and available for
everyone to use and apparently this is a
service that you'll be
you know in a way benefited by
and when i started talking with her
about you know like well it works in a
different way and actually what happens
is that
you get
well you are the the
product in a way you are commodified and
you are and you become a series of
numbers and data that then afterwards
get sold and well
whatever happens next right but then
again i thought like well it is very
interesting to have this conversation
with my grandma you know because even
though that she doesn't have facebook
she doesn't you know
participate perhaps actively
within these particular platforms
i think that at some point it also the
conversation has also escaped elsewhere
you know and it comes from the newspaper
and comes from the tv and the news that
she sees on tv and then she starts
wondering what are we doing with all of
this you know why is this
why if this sounds so bad why do we
treat it as if it was something we
cannot get rid of
when we
have never really needed that before
and whatever we need at the moment it's
definitely not that right
well and i think that's why i would
again i was so triggered by all of these
like terrible announcements about the
metaverse is that you know who asked
these to like drop this
right now honestly who who you know i'm
i'm sitting and thinking about the level
of genocide that has occurred just let's
just take south asia you know we've seen
myanmar go into genocide and now they're
in a coup
um in india we are in a genocidal moment
and every you know there was a program
last year on the platform
and um and there are millions of people
in camps with 15 camps already built
and it's going to get worse
and i would just i just think that
they're not even letting us grieve and
think about how violent this moment is
and i'm just so struck by like while our
people are just digging up the bones and
trying to make sense of the harm that's
caused they're still trying to steal the
stars you know and it's just and it's
it's an absurd
you know
forward push that we need to just stop
and you know i think that you know this
is a really great place to think about
res mamma nakam's work where he talks
about
white supremacy being white body
supremacy where there is a lived
somatized experience of trauma that you
know racially oppressed people face but
also so do white folks and whether it's
the the trauma of complicity the trauma
of actually being a perpetrator or a
harm doer there are ways that those
nervous systems are trained to just rush
past harm that has occurred and i'm
really asking for people that are in
those companies you cannot keep working
for these companies that they destroy
our earth and destroy our democracies as
someone who knows people who have been
personally harmed in pogroms
and who are dealing with the the chaos
this is american companies that are
doing this and i always think back to
like hannah arendt who talked about this
idea of like um the bureaucratic
murderer or the desktop murderer is that
you don't have to pick up a gun to kill
millions of people think about all the
people that are building the cold
building the code that are the integrity
civic integrity designers that are
saying oh we're trying to make the tool
better even as the tool is causing a
coup in the united states you did not do
your job it's actually impossible to do
your job because the entire platform
is bankrupt and corrupt
so at a certain point we have to decide
what are we doing here and we can't take
slow measures when we're talking about
you know detention camps being built and
and i know wade you have family that
survived the holocaust i think one of
the most terrible things you can do is
damn your children to having to
reconcile with the fact that you
allowed genocide to happen on their
watch
and i think of all of the children in
all of these societies that are so
polarized what a terrible burden you've
unleashed on them that they have to heal
the divides of polarization
that is just some foul
and in the context of that
the fact that we're sitting here and
saying okay we're gonna we're just gonna
keep building tech we're going to go
colonize other planets
we're not going to sit with the problems
that we've created
and i think we have a responsibility as
creators as technologists as visionaries
to say
before we can build anything further we
need to address the harm we need to sit
with our pain and our grief and we need
to be able to look at how do we actually
restore and repair from harm and that's
that's also part of world building right
that's what that's what forests do right
when a tree falls in the forest it's not
like the the forest is like let's put
another tree there you know that's the
role of the mycelial network and
mushrooms they break it down
and it's not just that they're breaking
it down they're consuming it and they're
they're really making it back into
fertile earth we need to look at our
problems and the harms and use the wound
as a door to be able to say we know harm
has occurred this is how we got here
we're never going to do it again and in
so doing we can actually process and
make plans in co-design in a much
different way
absolutely wow um we're right we're
quickly running out of time i think we
might be a little bit out of time but i
just wanted you know thank you so much
to mozy for that that was really
incredible before we close um i just
wanted to ask you a little bit
a little bit about equality labs and the
work that you're doing there because i
know that you have a really um a really
rich activist practice um in your work
and i'd love to you know tell the
audience a little bit more about what
you do there and how they might be able
to get involved
sure so equality labs is adult civil
rights organization and we work on the
issue of caste you know which is one of
the oldest systems of oppression in the
world
um you know and the way that it operates
in many domains you know and
all of our experiments whether they're
in tech or in culture or in political
advocacy or in learning
are always about how do we end cast
apartheid gender-based violence and
religious intolerance but i don't think
you get there just by blocking
strategies you also get there by
visionary strategies and you know dullet
feminist
adult feminist futures have a long
tradition in south asia and i consider
myself a futurist
and many many adult thinkers you know
have always tried to imagine um a
society that was free of caste and you
know there was this really beautiful
thinker named guru ravidass who imagined
a world where nobody you know a city
called begampura where nobody was hungry
and people walked hand in hand and women
were free as were people and there was
never an empty bowl because everyone was
fed and um and comforted and i think
that whether it's that moment there or
the way that i see the the radical
feminist survivors imagining a world
without
rape and thinking about how we can
return consent to all of the domains
that we operate in you know our work in
equality labs is really about that and
so there's advocacy there's technology
development that we do and culture
shifting because this is a time when we
need dreamers and you know you know when
you think about cast it impacts over 1.6
billion people in the world it's one of
the largest intersectional systems of
you know structural exclusion and so we
do our best to platform develop people
into many different arenas um in my work
i'm both an artist and a technologist
and so i create art and look at ways we
might be able to address these issues um
but i think for folks that want to get
involved you can always catch us on
equalitylabs.org or catch us on
instagram or twitter and you know we
always try to provoke questions and also
find new ways to see the terrains of
cast and it was some of our research
that really documented the level of
castus harm
uh you know that was coming out of
facebook and other social media
platforms as well as working with
workers all across the world who are
seeing castism in their workplace
and so you know last year you know for
folks that are in california you'll know
that the california department of
fairness and employment and housing sued
an american corporation cisco for
castism in their workplace and since
then we have worked with cast depressed
workers you know in
many companies who are working to try to
address the issue of castism there so
you know i think you know in our work
we're very multi-dimensional and
but always filled with joy and always
look forward to kind of building and
scheming with new collaborators so just
please reach out
wow um that's amazing you guys can go to
equalitylabs.org to learn more and i'll
also know not to sound too much like a
vlogger but you guys have some really
cool merch that kind of uh you know adds
some visibility to the cause and
supports the organization so check that
out uh audience members if you get a
chance then maureen it was so wonderful
to have you thank you thank you so much
for being here um this is wonderful
amazing so glad to be here and doreen's
so wonderful to share space with you as
well
oh thank you and thank you for the talk
and let's keep the conversation i just
wanted to share really quickly
this quote that was very very used
during the 90s in mexico with the
chiapas and la candona jungle struggle
that was um from subcomandante
i want a world where a lot of other
worlds can fit
and i think this makes perfect sense
with what you've been working on the
movie and um well thank you thank you so
much
wow what a perfect what a perfect quote
to sum it up serene wow
that was wonderful
um
i'm conscious that we're running a
little bit behind schedule which is
great there's so much interesting
conversations happening and so just if
you're watching this we're probably
going to be going a little bit late on
some of the other conversations later
this evening
um we're going to break for just a
minute or two and prepare the next talk
uh we'll be on with uh hawaiian maui
artist uh toyari ribeau in just a few
minutes and again mori thank you for
being here